Documentation: VM live migration internals documentation (#14574)
canonical/lxd: doc/reference/vm_live_migration_internals.md

[`migrateSendLive`](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/blob/main/lxd/instance/drivers/driver_qemu.go#L6666)

This function performs the live migration send process:

1. Connect to the QEMU monitor: The function begins by establishing a connection to the QEMU monitor using `qmp.Connect`.
1. Define disk names: The function defines names for the root disk (`lxd_root`), the NBD target disk (`lxd_root_nbd`), and the snapshot disk (`lxd_root_snapshot`). These will be used later to manage the root disk and its snapshot during migration.
1. Check for shared storage: If the migration involves shared storage, the migration process can bypass the need for synchronizing the root disk. The function checks for this condition by verifying if `clusterMoveSourceName` is non-empty and the pool is remote.
1. Non-shared storage snapshot setup: If shared storage is not used, the function proceeds to set up a temporary snapshot of the root disk.

>   - Migration capabilities such as `auto-converge`, `pause-before-switchover`, and `zero-blocks` are set to optimize the migration process.

Reviewer: Here, the bullets are rendering as:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b6d0bc03-035f-4870-abe2-0288123ca08b)

Author: That way we can use the dynamic numbering starting each top level point with `1.`.

Author: It looks like indenting 4 spaces as shown below works well:

```
1.
1.
    1.
    1.
```

  - The snapshot file is opened for reading and writing, and the file descriptor is passed to QEMU
  - The snapshot is added as a block device to QEMU, ensuring that it is not visible to the guest OS.
  - A snapshot of the root disk is taken using `monitor.BlockDevSnapshot`. This ensures that changes to the root disk are isolated during migration.
1. Revert function: The revert function is used to clean up in case of failure. It ensures that the guest is resumed, and any changes made during snapshot creation are merged back into the root disk if migration fails
1. Shared storage setup: If shared storage is used, only the `auto-converge` migration capability is set, and no snapshot creation is necessary.
1. Perform storage transfer: The storage pool is migrated while the VM is still running. The `volSourceArgs.AllowInconsistent` flag is set to true to allow migration while the disk is in use. The migration checks are done by calling `pool.MigrateInstance`.
1. Notify shared disk pools: For each disk in the VM, the migration process checks if the disk belongs to a shared pool. If so, the disk is prepared for migration by calling MigrateVolume on the source disk.

> 1. Setup NBD listener and connection: If shared storage is not used, the function sets up a Unix socket listener for NBD connections. This will handle the actual data transfer for the root disk during migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Set up NBD listener and connection: If shared storage is not used, the function sets up a Unix socket listener for NBD connections. This listener handles the actual data transfer for the root disk during migration.
```

>   - The listener is created, and the source starts listening for incoming NBD connections.

Reviewer: Here, the bullets are rendering like this:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5c63c101-f623-4375-b594-68730b0d52e1)

>   - The listener is created, and the source starts listening for incoming NBD connections.

Reviewer: Same issue with bullets as above

  - Once a NBD connection is accepted, data is transferred from the source VM to the migration target.
1. Begin block device mirroring: After setting up the NBD connection, the function starts transferring the migration snapshot to the target disk by using `monitor.BlockDevMirror`.
1. Send stateful migration checkpoint: The function creates a pipe to transfer the state of the VM during the migration process. It writes the VM's state to the `stateConn` via the pipe, using `d.saveStateHandle` to handle the state transfer.

>   - The source VM's guest OS is paused while the state is transferred. This ensures that the VM's state is consistent when the migration completes.

Reviewer: Same issue with bullet as above

1. Finalize snapshot transfer: If non-shared storage is used, the function waits for the state transfer to reach the `pre-switchover` stage, ensuring that the guest remains paused during this process.

>   - The function cancels the block job associated with the root snapshot to finalize the transfer and ensure that no changes are lost.

Reviewer: Same issue with bullet as above

---
discourse: ubuntu:[Online&#32;VM&#32;live-migration&#32;(QEMU&#32;to&#32;QEMU)](50734)
---

(vm-live-migration-internals)=
# LXD VM live migration implementation

> LXD supports {ref}`live-migration-vms` of virtual machines by streaming instance state from a source {abbr}`QEMU (Quick Emulator)` to a target QEMU. VM live migration is supported for all storage pool types.

Reviewer: The `{ref}` expands the header target, which is "Live migration for virtual machines". So in the RTD preview, this line currently reads: "LXD supports Live migration for virtual machines of virtual machines..."
Just need to remove the text "of virtual machines" here.

Or if you prefer to keep the "of" phrasing, use this syntax to override fetching the link text from the reference with your own link text:
```
{ref}`your preferred link text <header_target>`
```

As in:
```
{ref}`live migration of virtual machines <live-migration-vms>` by streaming ...
```

Author: Good to know, thanks! The `{ref}` expansion maintains the original casing for the header target. For now I'll just reword the sentence to start with "Live migration for virtual machines", but we may want to consider defining a Sphinx directive called something like `{ref_lowercase}` which converts the casing the lower.

API extension: `migration_vm_live`

## Conceptual process

The live migration workflow varies depending on the type of storage pool used. The two key scenarios are non-shared storage and shared storage within a cluster (e.g., Ceph). If live state transfer is not supported by a target, a stateful stop is performed prior to migration.

### Live migration for non-shared storage

This process leverages the QEMU built-in Network Block Device (NBD) client-server mechanism to transfer the virtual machine's disk and memory state. Below is an overview of the steps:

1. Set up connection.
1. Determine migration type (shared or non-shared storage).
1. Set migration capabilities.
1. Non-shared storage preparation.

> - Create and configure snapshot file for root disk writes during migration;

Reviewer: Due to the bullet points that are used in the middle, right now the RTD build shows this list like this:
<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/97c77bb9-baae-4091-a834-e85bef2b737f" width="100px" />

Where I think you want the last numbers to be 5 through 7. As a workaround, you could use 1.s for the first four numbers, then 5 for the fifth, and either 6.s for both the last two, or 6. and 7. That would work, but I think ultimately it would be more confusing to mix auto-numbering and manual numbering like that. I advise reverting to manual numbering in this case, as the simplest and most easy-to-maintain solution.

Author: Agreed - I think manual numbering is better in this case.

1. Validate cluster state and storage pool readiness.
1. Notify the shared disks that they will be accessed from another system.
1. Pause the guest OS on the source VM and transfer the live state data over the migration socket.
1. Stop and delete source VM.
1. Start the target VM using the transferred state.

## Migration API

Sending a `POST` request to `/1.0/instances/{name}` renames, moves an instance between pools, or migrates an instance to another server. In the push case, the returned operation metadata for migration is a background operation with progress data. For the pull case, it is a WebSocket operation with a number of secrets to be passed to the target server.

## Live migration call stack

Below is a general overview of the key functions of the live migration call stack:

### [`lxd/lxd/instance_post.go`](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/blob/main/lxd/instance_post.go)

1. [`instancePost`](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/blob/main/lxd/instance_post.go#L74)

This function handles post requests to the `/1.0/instances` endpoint.

### [`lxd/lxd/migrate_instance.go`](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/blob/main/lxd/migrate_instance.go)

> 1. [`Do`](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/blob/main/lxd/migrate_instance.go#L87)

Reviewer: "Do"? Is there supposed to be more text here?

Author: No, the function is literally named `Do`.

This function performs the migration operation on the source VM for the given state and operation. It sets up the necessary WebSocket connections for control, state, and filesystem, and then initiates the migration process.

### [`lxd/lxd/instance/drivers/driver_qemu.go`](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/blob/main/lxd/instance/drivers/driver_qemu.go)

1. [`MigrateSend`](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/blob/main/lxd/instance/drivers/driver_qemu.go#L6436)

This function controls the sending of a migration, checking for stateful support, waiting for connections, performing checks, and sending a migration offer. When performing an intra-cluster same-name migration, steps are taken to prevent corruption of volatile device configuration keys during the start and stop of the instance on both source and target.

1. [`migrateSendLive`](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/blob/main/lxd/instance/drivers/driver_qemu.go#L6666)

This function performs the live migration send process:

> 1. Connect to the QEMU monitor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Connect to the QEMU monitor: 
```

Reviewer: Please add colons to all the initial summary phrases. Otherwise, you get this in the built doc:

<img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/25082a39-1edb-4490-b301-77c93b2f963b" width="300px" />

---
discourse: 50734
---

(vm-live-migration-internals)=
# LXD VM live migration

LXD supports {ref}`live-migration-vms` of virtual machines by streaming instance state from a source {abbr}`QEMU (Quick Emulator)` to a target QEMU. VM live migration is supported for all storage pool types.

API extension: `migration_vm_live`

## Conceptual process

The live migration workflow varies depending on the type of storage pool used. The two key scenarios are non-shared storage and shared storage within a cluster (e.g., Ceph). If live state transfer is not supported by a target, a stateful stop is performed prior to migration.

### Live migration for non-shared storage

This process leverages the QEMU built-in Network Block Device (NBD) client-server mechanism to transfer the virtual machine's disk and memory state. Below is an overview of the steps:

1. Set {abbr}`QMP (QEMU Machine Protocol)` capabilities.

> 2. Temporary write buffer: Create a temporary {abbr}`QCOW2 (QEMU Copy on Write)` file to store writes that occur in the guest during the initial transfer of the root disk.

Author: Thanks for this tip!

> 3. Snapshot root disk.

Reviewer 2: "Snapshot" confuses me a bit here. Is it when the `qcow2` gets a backing device and then becomes the VM's disk?

Author: Here, snapshot is a point-in-time snapshot of the root disk - this is what gets transferred. At this point, there are no writes happening to the root disk, only the `qcow2` file.

Author: I don't think snapshot is the write word to use here, I can see how it is confusing given the other steps.

Author: I've moved the "high-level steps" into this section, and gone into depth on how `migrateSendLive` works in the "Implementation details>call stack>`migrateSendLive`" section.

Author: I was thinking of adding pseudocode for each key function in the call stack, but I'm not sure if it's necessary. What do you think?

Author: Most of the action is happening in `migrateSendLive`.

4. Database record creation: Create the target instance and volume database records.
5. Storage driver transfer.
6. Start target QEMU: Launch the QEMU process on the target.
7. Add NBD node: Attach the NBD target disk as a block node on the source. 

> 8. Block device mirror: Perform a block device mirror of the snapshot to the target NBD server.

Author: Here, snapshot is the aggregated/unified view, this was we capture changes that occur after the root disk transfer.

9. Pause source VM: Pause the source VM once the block device mirror enters `ready` state.
10. State transfer: Transfer the memory state over WebSocket.
11. Enter `pre-switchover` state.

> 12. Complete migration: Continue state migration until `completed` state reached.

Reviewer 2: I'd add the target VM is then resumed from the received and loaded state.
The source VM is stopped and its storage discarded.

```{figure} /images/vm_live_migration_flowchart.svg

> Non-Shared Storage Migration

Author: I've updated the graph.

```

The state transitions during the process are shown below:

```{figure} /images/vm_live_migration_fsa_diagram.svg
Non-Shared Storage Migration State Transitions
```

### Intra-cluster member live migration (Ceph shared storage pool)

For shared storage pools such as Ceph, disk data transfer is unnecessary. Instead, the process focuses on transferring the VM state through a dedicated migration socket:

1. Validate cluster state and storage pool readiness.

> 2. Transfer the live state data over the migration socket.

Reviewer 2: Same thing with numbered lists. Also, I'd mention the source VM is paused, etc.

3. Start the target VM using the transferred state.

## Implementation details

### Migration API

Sending a `POST` request to `/1.0/instances/{name}` renames, moves an instance between pools, or migrates an instance to another server. In the push case, the returned operation metadata for migration is a background operation with progress data. For the pull case, it is a WebSocket operation with a number of secrets to be passed to the target server.

### Live migration call stack

Below is a general overview of the key functions of the live migration call stack:

> #### [`lxd/lxd/instance_post.go`](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/lxd/instance_post.go)

Reviewer 2: This link gives a 404. Seems to be missing the branch name and some other bits needed for file view.

It seems to affect all links to files on GitHub.
